[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: It seems
our world is speeding up
with the rapid increase
of technological advances.
But at the same time,
there's a yearning
for deep meaning, connection,
and a heart-centered world.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
And joining me is the
Executive Vice President
of the HeartMath Institute,
Howard Martin who
has spent the last
few decades sharing
his proven and transformative
message that our hearts hold
a superior intelligence
that connects us all.
So tell me, since
we've last spoken,
our world is a different place.
>>HOWARD MARTIN: Yeah, it's
changing fast, isn't it?
>>LISA: Yes, it is.
There's a lot more chaos.
There's a lot more crisis.
>>MARTIN: Yes.
Speed of change is
accelerating, you know.
It's not going to get any
slower anytime soon either.
We're going through an
unprecedented amount change.
More change happening
in less time than ever
before in the
history of humankind.
Now it's not a bad thing.
It's certainly
stirring up a lot.
And we see the world's
problems on full display.
We see the chaos, the confusion,
all the social inequities,
all the suffering.
It's on full display.
>>LISA: Yes.
And because of technology,
we're more aware of it than ever
before.
>>MARTIN: We are
more aware of it.
And that's challenging
enough to be
able to try to deal
with what we're seeing.
There's good news
in this, though.
The spirit of humanity is
rising to the occasion.
And we are ushering in
a new and very different
world right in the
midst of the old one.
So I think that is an
interesting time to be alive.
It's certainly a
challenging time,
but also very opportunistic.
We have the ability
to change, to grow,
to make a difference, more
than ever before, really.
>>LISA: There is such--
there is like opposing forces.
You would feel there's
this amazing good
and the technology of
that HeartMath brings.
But there is also an equal
amount of disruption and lack
of morality and change.
>>MARTIN: You have old
ways of doing things
that are very entrenched.
And they're not all bad.
I mean the societies
evolved and they have
produced some amazing things.
But you have the old.
You have the new-- new ways of
thinking, new ways of doing.
They come together.
Where the old meets the
new, there's friction.
And that's what we
see on the news.
>>LISA: Yes.
That is a lot of what
we're seeing on the news.
And that's why there's so
much disruption and chaos.
And we're also divided.
We're not together in
a one coherent state
really, if you look at
our political systems
and so forth in the world.
But you're attempting to
do something different.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Separation is definitely a part
of the challenge that we face,
but also I see that
there's another larger
energetic momentum going on
as well of coming together,
of cooperation.
You see it maybe in business.
There's a term now called
coopetition, for example.
Of rather than competing
with everybody,
let's figure a way
we can work together
to make it better for everyone.
That's just one little example.
But I see that the spirit of
cooperation, actually, coming
in to the middle
of the separation
and the polarization that
seems so prevalent today.
>>LISA: Coopetition.
I love that.
It's how we work, really
how nature works together.
>>MARTIN: To me, it's part of
an evolution that's taking place
where a new world
is birthing itself
right in the midst of the one
that we have been existing
in for a very long time.
That's hard for people.
>>LISA: But super fast.
>>MARTIN: Super fast.
Yeah, a little window of time
when it's all happening very,
very quickly.
And people are having
a difficult time
with that very often,
both in terms of what
they feel personally inside
themselves, interpersonally,
societally, globally,
all of that.
>>LISA: I don't think we
have really the tools that we
have developed over
time to handle the pace
that we're at right now.
>>MARTIN: Well, we
do have something.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: We have this
magnificent intelligence
that can and does lift
us beyond our problems,
even in the midst of
the chaos and confusion.
It's something
that's been talked
about for thousands of years.
And what it's called is heart.
And when heart is brought out of
just the realms of spirituality
and philosophy and then put
it into practical application
in a daily life where
it's needed the most,
we can experience
a new existence,
a new life, a new
sense of fulfillment
that can really exceed even
our greatest expectations.
>>LISA: Well, you've spent
your greater part of your life
researching this, developing
this, and really looking
at the science behind it.
And you have done this
through science technology
and through something
that you call Add Heart.
Tell us a little about that.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
First of all, at HeartMath one
of the things that we did early
on when HeartMath
was actually created,
now 28 years ago,
it was recognized
we had to build a bridge between
what people thought about heart
and would have been
written about it
and said for thousands of
years and this daily living.
How could this be applied
in mainstream ways
so that it could have impact on
individual and societal ways?
That bridge we chose was
the bridge of science.
>>LISA: What did people
think about heart?
>>MARTIN: Well, they
saw it as sweet.
They saw it as sentimental.
They saw it as a
nice thing to have,
but not necessarily something
that played out in what
they were doing in their lives.
Terms like you don't
bring heart into business
or those kinds of terminologies
were quite prevalent.
And yet there was a
longing for more heart.
You know, I think people want
to feel love and feel cared for.
They want to feel kindness.
All these aspects of humankind
were sort of in conflict
with societal programming
about what heart is.
And so we needed to
straighten that out
or do what we could do to build
that bridge between the two.
And science is what we chose.
And the reason we
chose science is
because in modern
society when something
is proven through empirical
scientific research,
it becomes more believable.
We believe what
science says to us.
So we set about trying
to show that what
had been said about heart
for thousands of years
was actually true through
a scientific lens.
>>LISA: We've seen the
movies that it's all
been about love and
romance, but you're actually
able to attach science
to that feeling?
>>MARTIN: In a sense, yeah.
What we're able to show is
that there is an intelligence
that we have.
It's not just based
upon the brain
and the logical, linear
intelligence, which
are obviously important.
But there's another bandwidth,
so to speak, of intelligence
that we access.
It's more intuitive in nature.
It's more high speed.
It looks out for the whole.
And it really brings us more
into contact with who we truly
are, our authentic self.
And so when we
started to do science,
we realized, OK, we have to
look at the physical heart.
What's it doing?
Is it just pumping blood?
And what we found was that
there was a story scattered
throughout the research
literature in little pieces
showing that the
heart was certainly
doing more than pumping blood.
So our scientific team,
doing their own research
and then borrowing from the
little pieces of research,
were able to clearly show
that the physical heart is
an information processing
center in our bodies.
>>LISA: How is that determined?
>>MARTIN: Well, you
determine it looking at ways
in which it communicates.
I mean, for example, most
people don't know this,
but the heart has
a nervous system.
Next to the brain, it's
the most complex part
of the nervous
system that we have.
It's actually studied through
a field called neurocardiology.
But I call these
things who knew?
Who knew this was
actually happening?
And it communicates
for the brain
through a nerve pathway
that starts in the heart.
And that nerve pathway
goes all the way
to the higher perceptual
centers of the brain.
And when scientists look
at the neurological traffic
in the body, they
can clearly see
that the heart is sending a lot
more information to the brain
than it ever gets from it.
>>LISA: So it
starts in the heart
and sends the
signal to the brain.
>>MARTIN: To the brain.
And brain function is
critically dependent
upon this information.
And so there are other ways.
There's hormonal communication.
This is another who new.
The heart produces
a lot of hormones.
There's a blood pressure way
of communication, biophysical.
And then the one that's
most interesting to me,
the one that's coolest, I think
is the energetic communication.
Your heart produces an
electromagnetic field.
Surrounds each and every
one of us in 360 degrees.
And extends outside of our
body about three to four feet.
So our fields right
now, yours and mine
are like we're communicating.
It's not an aura or subtle
energy I'm talking about.
It's very measurable,
electromagnetic energy.
>>LISA: That's
fascinating, especially
if you were to look at
it through something
that measures that,
you'd see a field that
is crossing between us.
>>MARTIN: Exactly.
>>LISA: And that field then
goes out way beyond us.
>>MARTIN: It does.
And that field, we
encode that field.
The frequencies in the field
are changing all the time.
And we are encoding it.
And here's how.
We do it through our emotions.
What we're feeling
is actually being
broadcast through that field.
We're imprinting that field
with our emotional state.
So if we're feeling really
good, like we are right now you
and I having a good
time being together here
at Gaia doing an interview,
that's transmitting.
If we were to feel angry
or frustrated or irritated,
it's imprinting the
field with that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: So the field
is always changing.
Now, you brought
up a good question.
This is a very
conservative measurement
of an electromagnetic field.
But what if we begin to
think about these fields
through the lens of, let's
say, quantum physics, which
removes the barriers of time
and space as we know them?
So where does this heart
field really connect to?
Where does it go?
And what does it
really connect us to?
These are interesting
questions that we are exploring
through our research today.
>>LISA: Well, this
research is amazing.
So there's a photo you have
here of the electrophysiology
of intuition.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Well, one of the aspects of
what we call heart intelligence
is a heightened
sense of intuition.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Let me just speak
a little to intuition.
I believe intuition is really
like a field of information
that's always there.
>>LISA: Is that the coding?
>>MARTIN: No.
It's more like just
this information.
We draw in information from
what we can call consciousness.
And we turn that into what
we see as our reality.
And we make choices
from that information.
To me, intuition is part of
that field of consciousness.
And again, it's like we see
it as ahas and insights.
But it's really something
that's always there.
And we sort of tune into it or
tune out of it all the time.
So our researchers
wanted to know
was there anything
physiologically
happening when we were, saying,
having an intuitive experience?
So they did a very
complex study published
in the "Journal of Alternative
and Complementary Medicine."
And by the way, there
are over 300 peer
reviewed, published research
studies done by HeartMath.
So lots of research.
This one was particularly
interesting to me.
They had test subjects
who were sitting
in front of the computer.
And they were taking a variety
of biological measurements
simultaneously at
the same time--
brainwave activity, lots
of heart function activity,
skin response activity, lots of
physiological data going back.
They were sitting in front of
a computer loaded with images.
They had been
carefully selected.
Some of the images
were horrific.
Someone being stabbed or a
snake jumping out at you.
The other images were very
emotionally evocative,
rainbows, and bunny rabbits
and things like that.
The computer was set
on random selection.
It wasn't programmed.
It was randomly selected.
And what they would do
is that an instruction
would come on the computer
to push the button.
They push a button.
Screen would stay
blank for six seconds.
Then the picture emerged.
Then the screen
would go blank again.
The picture would stay on
screen for three seconds.
And that was repeated over
and over and over again.
Now, when they
analyzed the data--
this was really interesting--
They found that in
many, many cases,
the physiological response
to the upcoming picture
was actually happening six
seconds before the picture was
on the screen.
>>LISA: Preemptively.
>>MARTIN: Preemptively.
The body was doing what it would
do if the picture was there.
But it wasn't there yet.
Now--
>>LISA: How does that happen?
>>MARTIN: They continued
an analysis of that.
And they started looking at the
information traffic occurring
in the body during
this those periods.
They found that the first
part of our physiology
to respond to the picture that
wasn't there was the heart.
A second and a half
later, the brain
responded accordingly to
what the picture should be.
And a second and a
half before the picture
emerged, brain and heart coupled
together at a frequency level.
And then there was a picture.
So the sequence was heart,
brain, heart brain together,
picture.
>>LISA: And so then we use this
in our lives all of the time.
I mean as a mother
I can feel parts
of what's going on with
my daughter with her not
even being around.
But can we feel that as
a collective society?
Where we are--
we're aware of war.
We're aware of
turmoil happening.
Doesn't that
constantly harbor us?
>>MARTIN: It does.
But let me, if I may, come
in on a point you just made.
When we think about intuition
at HeartMath-- and we
have modules in our
training programs
on what we call
practical intuition.
Because we see it as practical.
Doesn't have to be
looked as mystical.
And you brought up a great
point that I sometimes
use as an analogy for that
and it's being a mother.
Parenting is such an
intuitive process.
How do you know what
that child needs?
How do you communicate
with that child?
How do you sense?
Well, you sense that,
very poignantly,
through love, through
the love that you
have with the child and the
love the child has for you.
And because of that,
you access an intuition,
a form of practical
intuition, that allows
you to be a really good parent.
So that's the way I see.
>>LISA: It happens with
partners as well and siblings
and so forth.
It's whatever there's
a love connection,
a relationship like that.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
So, yeah.
I think there is societal
intuition where we're sensing
similar things as a society.
Unknowingly, but behaviors
change in mass a lot of times
very quickly.
We're actually tuning
into the same frequency.
And society goes
through a transition.
And I think that there is an
intuitional component that
comes along with that.
>>LISA: Now I can
see that with love.
And I can see that with
a familial relationship.
But back to the
question about when
there are harmful things
being done to our planet
or to our ecosystem or
to human trafficking,
I mean when we know stuff
like that is happening,
what do we shut that off?
I mean aren't we
constantly-- we can't
decipher the love
versus the hate, can we?
>>MARTIN: No.
It is a problem that
people face today.
And it can be an
overload on the emotions
when you see all the
many problems that
are on full display today.
And you just listed a few
that are pretty tough, right?
And that can sort of
bring our feeling down.
And in our own inner
vibrations, so to speak,
can get lowered as we begin
to look at all these world
events and situations
that people go through.
What's interesting about
it is that it actually
starts out with feelings
of compassion and care.
We see this and
we have compassion
for people that are exposed to
things like human trafficking
or war, the refugee crisis,
and all the list of things
that are going on there.
But what happens
over time is that we
lose a certain connection to
the true compassion and care.
And it becomes
something like sympathy
or the draining kind of
care that we call overcare
at HeartMath.
And so this is the challenge
we all face today is how do we
maintain a certain
uplifting pitch
or vibration in our
perspective of the world
and at the same
time not ignore it?
So to me, it's not
about shutting off.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: Now, here's
one thing that I do.
It may be useful
for people to know.
It's like I don't
shut the news off.
I do look at what's
going on in the news.
But let's say I'm
looking at, let's say,
the CNN site or
something on my phone.
Most of the time I
don't read the articles.
I simply look at the headline.
The headline can
keep me informed so
that I can stay connected to the
world and have the compassion.
If I start reading the
stories, I get into the drama.
I get into all the news.
And then my feelings
begin to shift.
And then the judgments
come in of like I can't
believe they're doing that.
And I can't believe
this is happening.
And as I started to
catch myself from that,
I recognize that having
some concern is not bad.
But if it goes into the
judgments and the anger and all
that, then I'm
losing my connection
to the true compassion that
that situation probably needs.
>>LISA: I do the same thing.
I look at the headlines.
And I just kind of read them
intuitively, so to speak.
You mentioned something
called overcare.
What is overcare?
>>MARTIN: Overcare is when
your original care takes
on the characteristics of
an overburdensome sense
of responsibility.
>>LISA: Ah, leading to illness.
>>MARTIN: And leading
to a lot of things.
And so overcare is a state
that exist in the world.
It's just ubiquitous.
We don't even notice it.
It's like the air we breathe.
We don't see it.
And overcare is that way.
And it has many different forms.
I wrote about that
in the first book
that I authored with Doc
Childre, "HeartMath Solution,"
we had a whole
chapter on overcare.
And I talked about the sons
and daughters of overcare.
Things like perfectionism
would be a form of overcare.
We really have to get
everything right or we're bad.
We're wrong.
>>LISA: Or we're out of control.
>>MARTIN: Talk about
overcare like care
itself is one of the most
beautiful things we experience
in life.
You know?
Caring for someone feels
good and receiving true care
from another feels good.
Overcare is when that
care feels draining.
And when overcare is
being focused on you,
it's not comfortable.
Like the overcaring mother
or the overcaring person
that is constantly
worrying about that.
Never really feels great.
You know?
You can learn, however,
to bring yourself back
to the original care.
Because if there is good
news about overcare,
it's that you never get
to overcare unless you
cared in the first place.
>>LISA: True.
>>MARTIN: So you
can always go back
to the original care about
the person or the situation.
And you can rekindle
that feeling of care.
It just becomes a
little exercise,
a game to be played
of catching overcare.
>>LISA: It's interesting that
you would go there, especially
in HeartMath because you're
talking about this intuition
and how you can sense
things before they happen
and so forth.
A person in overcare
would be out of balance
with something like that, right?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
You'll cut off from
those feelings.
You know, we cut
ourselves off from a lot
of the good things that are
there for us, like intuition.
And it comes from, to me,
having a difficult time learning
how to regulate our emotions.
I'm using the term regulate
very intentionally there.
I don't want that to be
confused with suppressing
emotions or not Feeling
>>LISA: I was just
going to mention that.
I was thinking about
traumatic childhoods
when you have that level
of-- and the tendency
is to suppress or disconnect.
How can HeartMath help
with something like that?
>>MARTIN: Well, with
HeartMath, our approach
is just to acknowledge, to
look at, and acknowledge
the emotions that we feel.
But then to recognize that
we have a power within us.
And the power that sometimes
goes underestimated
is we have the power and ability
to make emotional choices.
Emotions are not just
something that happen to us.
They are something
that we can actually
begin to direct and control
through our choices.
And so acknowledge the
emotions that we feel.
Don't suppress them.
Don't wipe them
under the carpet.
But in a lot of cases, not
all, but in a lot of cases,
it's not necessary
to dig on into them
and try to figure out where
they came from and why
and all of that.
Many of the emotions we can
experience can be shifted.
If I'm at the
airport later today
and I get irritated
and frustrated
at a long line or
something, I don't
need to try to analyze
where that came from.
>>LISA: How many times
have I waited my life?
>>MARTIN: You know, I just
need to shift it, right?
And so I can learn to
make emotional choices
in that regard.
As we string together
emotional choices
that are more uplifting over
time, it begins to change us.
>>LISA: You know, you
just mentioned resilience.
You just mentioned something
that you have perfected.
Many have not.
That ability to bounce
back or not get upset about
and to move on.
Those three things
you just said.
That is a skill you've probably
spent a lot of time perfecting.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
And I don't know
about perfection.
I mean it's an ongoing process.
>>LISA: So it is for all of us.
>>MARTIN: Growing and
changing all the time.
But you're right, it is a skill.
And here's one
way to look at it.
Look at it from the lens
of energy accumulation
or depletion.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: We wake
up every morning
with a certain amount of mental,
emotional, and physical energy.
And then how we
spend that energy
during the course
of the day ends up
determining the
quality of that day.
Some of the choices
that we make,
especially emotionally, add
to our energy bank account.
And some don't.
Some drain it.
Really.
>>LISA: True.
>>MARTIN: And so
resilience is something--
the way we look at
resilience at HeartMath
is that, yes, it is the
ability to bounce back.
But we also look at
it through the lens
of it being a reservoir
of energy we accumulate.
We build it.
And so you build up your energy
bank account or the resilience
that you have in that account.
And what happens then is that
you move through life with less
stress and less strain.
You have more flow.
You begin to deflect
stressors before they even
have a chance to take you out.
And then one of the
big things come up,
when the triggers
really do happen,
you go through that
process, but you get back
to the feeling of balance.
So you return to
home more quickly,
because you've got
more to draw from.
And so you do come back
more quickly to a place
where life feels better.
>>LISA: So you wake up with a
certain amount of this energy.
And good things make
you add to the energy.
And then there's things
that deplete the energy.
The idea is to have more
things in your life--
I mean it could be
a scented candle.
It could be a conversation
with someone, a stranger,
that you don't know
that was great.
I mean it could be those little
things that just fill you up,
right?
>>MARTIN: Want to take
it one more level?
>>LISA: Please.
>>MARTIN: It's our response to
those things that determines
the energy bank account.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: We can often setup
scenarios or situations
in our life that promote
well-being, promote that type
of lifestyles that we want.
Whether there's a scented
candle or the walk
on the beach or a course
that we take or watching
a show like we're watching
today, all of that
is the choices that people make
to give them an opportunity
to then make choices about
how they react to it.
Here's an analogy.
Walt Disney built Disney
World as a place people
could go where they could just
go away from their regular life
and experience a complete
wonderful, beautiful, happy
fantasy land, right?
And today, or any
day really, people
can go to Disney
World or Disneyland
and they can experience
some of that in the spirit
it was intended.
Or they can stay upset and angry
about long lines, high prices,
what the kids are
doing or what was
said in the car between
them and a spouse
before they went to the park.
All that's a choice.
So the environment of
Disney World can be lifting
or it can be just another day.
And it's the same with anything
that we bring into our lives.
So the next level
of that is to learn
that it's still
an inside-out job
and that it is
intelligent to put things
in our life that promote a lift
in spirit or a lift in growth.
But then it becomes a matter
of let's take advantage
of those things.
>>LISA: So it is our
response to the line
at Disneyland or whatever,
it's our response
to that we can control.
>>MARTIN: Exactly.
And I'm not suggesting we
walk around like robots
and never feel anything.
But at the same time, I've
learned over the years
that there's certain
points in time when
I can just cut that stuff off
and recognize it's not right.
It's not good.
It's not helping me.
It's not helping anybody else.
And make that conscious
choice from a mature place
using good old heart to
help me make that move.
>>LISA: So what if we were to do
this collectively as a society,
as groups?
And you have done
these experiments.
>>MARTIN: You know,
when you alluded
to that a few minutes ago and
I didn't answer your question,
there is a movement happening
in the world right now.
A very lifting powerful
movement happening
amidst all the confusion and
chaos and stuff that we see.
I call it the Ad Heart Movement.
It's a movement where
people are manifesting
very naturally, but
very intentionally,
aspects and qualities of heart.
Which means more cooperation
and less competition.
It means more innovation
rather than simply
succumbing to the problems.
It is being kinder,
more compassionate, more
understanding, more listening.
Considering the whole, rather
than just the individual self.
This is happening.
And it's happening
all over the world.
I see it everywhere that I go.
And I see people that are
beginning to live this way.
Their values are changing.
Their perspectives are changing.
They are being more contributing
to the well-being of the world
and to others.
That's why you have movements
of other kinds happening today.
I see them sort of as umbrellaed
by this Ad Heart Movement,
but why you have people standing
up for certain things now.
Where you have these kids
in Parkland, Florida,
that created a movement
around gun control.
There hearts are opening
up saying enough of this.
So it doesn't necessarily
look like heart
like we've seen it
before, which is
always soft and always sweet.
But it's got
aspects of, look, we
need to take care of this in it.
>>LISA: I see that with
the MeToo movement as well.
These movements are
predicated by chaos and crisis
and something that gets you
to the deeper, deeper part
of your heart.
Rather than that
romantic love part,
there's a deep,
passionate, almost--
I wouldn't say anger,
but that spurs it on.
>>MARTIN: Well,
anger can start it.
And then when the
movement really
starts to take on its true power
is when it ripens and matures
into where some of that
anger at judgment goes away
and it becomes like let's just
find a way to get this worked
out and get it done.
But sometimes it takes
an initial thrust
to get the ball rolling.
And then in the
intelligence over time
matures and goes into ways
in which it can really
be orchestrated.
Because a lot of times,
getting something changed
is not always going to get
there by hammering on it.
You know it requires a nuanced
approach to get that done.
And a lot of those
movements end up
getting to a place like that.
So this connection
that's happening
around the world and these
qualities of heart that are
showing up are what excites me.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: I've been
doing this a long time.
And to see this actually
manifesting in my lifetime,
to see-- yeah, I
see the problems.
I'm aware of those and
my compassion goes out.
>>LISA: So you have a great
story here of Josh and Mabel.
And this is a great way to show
kind of heart and intuition.
Can you share this with us?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
I think what we're doing
at HeartMath now in terms
of our research, our Rollin
McCraty and the research team,
they are doing a lot of
work on understanding
energetic connectivity, showing
that we are all connected
through a vast web of
energetic connections
that exist on this
planet and beyond.
And that every living system
is connecting energetically.
Now some really cool
experiments have been done just
to illustrate this.
And one of those that you've
asked me to talk about
is Josh and Mabel.
Mabel was a beautiful Labrador
retriever, sweetest heart
you could ever imagine.
She was my dog.
Josh is the son of Rollin
McCraty, Director of Research.
Josh and Mabel developed
a loving relationship.
And one day Roland
decided he would
see if he could measure that.
So you can see changes
in emotional state
by looking at changes
in our heart rhythms.
And when we're
really synced up, we
enter this state
called coherence.
And when we're in this
state of coherence,
our heart rhythms become
very sine wave like.
Like this.
I'm drawing it now in the air.
Sine wave like pattern.
And that means you're
really in sync with yourself
and it's called
the coherent state.
So he put devices on
the dog and the boy
that can measure heart rhythms.
He had the boy in one room
and the dog in another.
He told Josh to
walk into that room
and not touch Mabel,
just walk into the room.
So Josh walks into the room.
As soon as he
enters the room, he
goes into the state of
coherence as he sees Mabel.
And simultaneously, exactly
the same time, the dog does to.
>>LISA: Matches him?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Matches the heart rhythm.
>>LISA: Exact same pattern.
>>MARTIN: Exact same
pattern at the same time.
>>LISA: You can see
this on the screen.
Great.
>>MARTIN: Synchronized.
And then Josh leaves the
room and Mabel's pattern
goes back to the normal pattern.
It's a picture of the
power of love between a boy
and a dog through
a scientific lens.
You know what I mean?
But it's beautiful,
because it sort of grounds
the science out.
You know, science
is very complex.
But when you see synchronization
measured through changes
in heart that are being
experienced not through touch
in this case--
although they could be helpful--
but just through being
in a loving situation.
And Josh and Mabel's a great
way to illustrate that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
So this electromagnetic
field, essentially,
is what they're sharing, right?
>>MARTIN: They are
sharing that for sure.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So this field, we know
happens interpersonally
and with loved ones.
But let's talk a little
bit about globally
how this could help us.
And we've touched on
this a little bit.
But the Earth's magnetic field.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>MARTIN: This is
really fun stuff.
The Earth has magnetic fields.
Think about them like
energetic ecology.
They're protective
layers around our Earth
that protect us from incoming
solar winds and space
weather and all that.
If the fields weren't
there, nothing
that we would associate
with life would be here.
We'd be a dead planet.
So we have a geomagnetic
field in the ionosphere.
Now, these fields are
constantly changing.
And what changes them a
lot is solar activity.
And so as the sun changes and
more solar flares and radiation
and all of that and changes
in solar wind speed,
things like that,
fields begin to change.
Now a lot of science
has already been
done in showing these
fields are affecting us.
Human health and behavior
is being influenced
by the geomagnetic fields.
But what we're discovering
today through the new research
that we're doing is that we're
more synchronized than we ever
thought.
The changes in these fields
are creating mass effects
around the planet
that are very similar.
A recent study we did
was done with people
in five different countries
around the world over a period
of a number of months wearing
portable heart rate variability
recorders, looking
at heart rhythms.
And then being sent
psychometric surveys randomly
of what are you feeling
right now and all of that.
And then correlating what was
happening with the sun, what
was happening in geomagnetic
field measurement,
with that outcome.
And what we were able to
see is that similar effects
were occurring all around
the world at the same time.
People's heart rhythms were
changing and corresponding
to the geomagnetic field.
Why is this important?
It's important to me
because what it's showing
is that we're all connected.
We're in this together.
We're less separate
than we think.
>>LISA: But did you
record the solar flare
before or after
the measurements?
>>MARTIN: Well, we would
look at the solar flare
that you know that
there is one happening.
And it takes a little
time for that effect
to get to the Earth.
But then looking at what's
happening in the readings
we're getting from the people.
And also what they're reporting
through the psychometric
surveys and seeing
correlations happening
all around the world
that are taking place.
I mean these people
are in Saudi Arabia.
They were Lithuania.
They were in California.
You know, it was amazing.
And so, again, the
interconnectivity research
that we're doing is
designed, I think,
to give us a sense
that we're not alone.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, it's true.
I was watching-- there's a
game-- it was the World Cup.
And there was an
underdog team, Mexico,
and they were playing
against Germany.
And there was an upset
at the end of the game.
And Mexico won.
And at that moment
that Mexico won,
it was actually registered
as seismic activity
on the Richter scale because
of the explosive emotion
that came from Mexico,
in Mexico and the region.
Which is so amazing
because it shows,
not only the spirit of
Mexico around soccer,
but it showed the
on the Richter scale
that activity that happened
because everybody was doing it
at once.
It wasn't electromagnetic.
It was actually
seismic activity.
Which is fascinating.
So I see that.
I mean a lot of that can happen
around sporting events and so
forth or Olympics and so
forth when you see the world
come together.
>>MARTIN: We are
testing all that.
>>LISA: Are you?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Through the Global
Coherence Initiative,
which is one of
our projects, we--
>>LISA: Let's talk about that.
>>MARTIN: --created a network
of sensor sites, very sensitive
technology that measures
changes in the geomagnetic field
and the ionosphere.
And we're placing
those around the world
and feeding information
back to our research labs
in northern California.
And we're doing that for a
variety of reasons-- one,
to contribute to the academic
understanding of these fields,
two, to continue to develop
the research on the effect
those fields are having on us.
But also, we are testing
an interesting hypothesis.
Hypothesis simply
said would be this
that mass human emotion,
whether positive or negative
is having a measurable impact
on the Earth's energetic fields.
>>LISA: Oh, it's the reverse.
>>MARTIN: Reverse.
Now a lot of
research has to go in
to seeing if a hypothesis
like this is true or not.
It has to be looked
at during neutrally
to be doing good science, right?
But our belief is that when
you have 7.7 billion people
on the planet all feeling
something all with their own
feels, that when a mass
emotion is experienced
in a large number of people
that it could be influencing
those fields and be detected.
Ultimately, what I envision
is it we'll get to the point
where the technology is
sophisticated enough,
that we can identify
certain regions in the world
that we-- let's
say-- call them spots
where the field is different
from the other parts
of the field.
>>LISA: I mean you would think
that the electromagnetic field
from northern California
would differ than that
of the one in Saudi Arabia.
Look at the history,
look at what's happening.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
And it's is possible
that it does.
And again, it takes a lot of
time and energy and research
to do this.
I applaud our scientists--
>>LISA: Spoken like
a true scientist.
Yes, yes.
>>MARTIN: They are, I mean,
most of the time it would
be something like a
government or a big university
that takes this on, but
HeartMath's taking it on
to do this type of research.
And again, it's helping to
show something I said earlier
that we are all
connected energetically
through this vast web of
energetic connections.
And that's important because
it recognizes that we
are influencing each other.
>>LISA: So our electromagnetic
field and our coherent state
can actually impact
other living systems
like plants, trees, animals.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
We're doing some very
interesting research now
on trees, looking at the
electrical energy produced
by trees, around
the world, actually.
And we know nature has
an influence on us.
We feel that.
That's why we take that walk
in the woods or on the beach.
It can probably go
the other way as well
that we are interfacing and
connecting on energetic levels
with all living systems,
including plants and trees.
And some of the new research
that we're doing right now
is exploring that and
discovering some amazing things
about trees.
They're putting sensors on trees
all around the world as well.
And they're showing, of
course, that trees produce
a lot of electrical energy.
Who knew?
But they do.
And they're also showing that
electrical energy in the trees
is being affected by the
energetic fields of the planet.
And that the same geomagnetic
influences that affect people
are also affecting plants.
Which again, is building this
bridge between all living
systems interconnected and
finding out some amazing things
about trees that I didn't know.
>>LISA: Tell me.
>>MARTIN: Plants communicate.
They communicate through
a variety of ways.
They often communicate
chemically.
For example, you can have
an infestation, let's say,
that it comes into a forest.
And those trees will
communicate with one another.
And the first ones
hit will communicate.
And then the ones that
haven't been hit yet
can release enzymes
and protect themselves.
And they actually a whole
communication goes on.
In "National Geographic," what
I read was is that and more
said that in some places,
the trees actually--
trees and plants actually
share nutrients across species
through the roots.
Meaning that when you have
a group of trees over here
that is doing
really and you might
have another group of trees,
a different species, that's
not doing so good, they'll
send them nutrients.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Like an immune system.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
And trees are doing
this all the time.
And we didn't know this.
And so there's a lot of
communication happening even
at the level of
plants and trees.
Now all living
systems' connected.
This is important
because it shows
that we feed the
field with what we do,
with our thoughts
and our feelings.
And a question that I
ask myself all the time
is what am I feeding
the field right now?
Because I'm making
a contribution
that is, in some way, impacting
the well-being of everything
else, the well-being of others.
>>LISA: So even with that
daily thought-- that's not even
daily-- moment to
moment thought,
you're affecting and
impacting the field.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: It really
makes you think
about what your thoughts are.
>>MARTIN: It does.
And also a belief I've
had for a long time,
I guess it's based
now upon experience
is I believe that we all live in
this vast field of energy that
is reflecting back to us not
what we just think up here,
but really what we
feel right here.
Our true self, our true
heart is feeding this field.
And that's reflecting back.
And the quality of our life
and what happens in our life
is, in many ways, being
determined by that reflection.
We're making some very important
choices right now individually
and collectively, as
a global society, that
are influencing our future.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTIN: It's not easy.
We started our
conversation today
with the challenges
people face dealing
with all of this change.
But there is more
than just hope.
Hope is cool.
But hope is a leader into
understanding that there
is change in the air.
So I want people to
understand that they
have this beautiful part of
themselves inside called heart.
>>LISA: Well, when you say
that we can make daily changes
and we can really think
really intentionally what
we're putting into the
field, yet at the same time,
there's a lack of morality
happening in the field as well.
So are we able to, if
there are enough of us,
impact the damage that
the lack of morality
would do to the field?
>>MARTIN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: What size of numbers?
How would that work?
>>MARTIN: It's hard
to put a number on it.
But maybe I'll just use a
good old backyard analogy.
Coherence is more
powerful than incoherence.
Order is more concentrated
and focused than disorder.
So you've seen these commercials
on TV where they'll say,
you know, buy this solution
and you can clean anything.
You know what I mean?
And they'll say and
only put one cap
of this in the gallon of water.
Well, it's concentrated.
It can offset and influence
that whole gallon of water.
A little bit of
love, a little bit
of care, a little bit
of kindness put out
in the midst of chaos and
confusion can be like that.
It can change things.
You think about in your life,
how many of the little caring
acts that you experienced in
your life have stayed with you
your whole life,
little things people
did, people you may
not have even known,
that you still remember?
So it doesn't take but a little
bit of heart put into the world
to offset a lot of
that lack of heart.
>>LISA: I find you
beautifully optimistic.
>>MARTIN: Well, I am.
I don't know about
the beautifully part,
but I'm optimistic, yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
I mean there's not a challenge
I can throw at you that you
don't have a great answer for.
>>MARTIN: Well,
here's the thing.
One of the best ways we can
deal with these changing times
is to always at least
make the effort to--
I'm going to use an unusual
term now-- turn up the edges.
Always try to take it this way.
You know?
No matter what happens,
recognize you can handle it.
It will get handled
at some point.
You will handle it.
Try to keep the things
turned up a little bit.
If you do that
moment to moment, day
to day for a while,
what's going to happen
is the whole thing
begins to change.
The viewpoints begin to change.
And you do become more
naturally optimistic.
I consider myself to be like
a pragmatically optimistic.
I don't--
>>LISA: Because of the science?
>>MARTIN: I don't-- well,
because I don't ignore
the problems.
I do see that we got a lot
of challenges in front of us.
So I guess the optimism
is coming from the fact
that I believe that
we are going to have
a new and very different world.
And it won't take
forever to get there.
>>LISA: What would
that look like?
>>MARTIN: It's hard to say.
And I get asked this in
interviews from time to time,
so I finally had to come up with
my true, authentic answer which
is I don't know.
>>LISA: Oh, come on.
Give me an idea.
>>MARTIN: Here's
what's happening.
We are going through
a dimensional shift
in consciousness.
We've never experienced anything
like this on Earth before.
And what's coming is something
we've never had before.
The best we can do
right now is to try
to put new clothes on
old things to determine
what it's going to be like,
but it's something different.
If we were living
in the late 1800s
and we were sitting
outside and the guy said,
you know-- he comes up on a
horse and buggy-- and he says,
you know, there's going
to be new transportation.
You know?
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: Well, we
can't see at that point
the airline industry.
What we see at that point
is a different horse
or a different buggy.
That's kind of where we are.
We haven't seen
around the corner yet.
What's coming is
going to be amazing.
And it's inevitable.
My feeling is that
the shift that's
going on in consciousness
and the reemergence of heart
is part of the evolutionary
imperative of our time.
Is that whether we like it
or not, it's going to happen.
Now, what we do have influence
over are two main things.
We can influence
how long it takes.
And we can influence how
hard or how easy it can be.
We can make the ride smoother.
And we can make it shorter.
Eventually, we're
going to get there.
The world is not
going to blow up.
We're headed in the
right direction.
You know, I see the trend
graph going this way,
like moving in the
right direction.
Yeah, you got the ups and
downs along that graph--
this terrorist
attack, this tsunami,
this problem with whatever,
politics, who knows--
I see the trend graph like this.
But I see it going that way.
I see it's inevitable.
I see the human
spirit is emerging
in such beautiful
and dynamic ways.
When our backs are against
the wall, a lot of times
is when we found
our true hearts.
And when people find
that heart, then they
come into this beautiful
being that they really
are, beautiful person
that they really are.
So backs against the
wall a lot of times
is what it's taken
to get people there.
That can improve
and has improved.
>>LISA: You give
this great example
about the solar activity and
how the solar activity is
correlated with these
bursts of creativity.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: So could we basically
take the-- and I'd love you
to explain that a
little bit more--
and can we take the kinetic
activity of, say, a storm
and transfer that into
something positive?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
I think a lot of these
energetic influences
I'll call them, like
the solar activity
or whatever are really neutral.
In other words, they're
not out to get us.
They're neutral.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: It depends on
how we're relating to them.
What vibration are we accessing
that influence through?
Researchers have gone
back into history
and been able to look at
plants and various things
and to understand
solar cycles, right?
And they can see that some
of the greatest flourishings
in arts and science
and all of that
in the history of humankind were
happening when the solar cycles
were really high.
Unfortunately, many people
look through the lens
of the solar cycle
being something that's
bad that's out to get them.
It's a solar flare, oh, my
god, it's coming to get me.
you know?
Well, there can be some
energetic influence there.
It can increase irritability
and frustration.
>>LISA: What is a solar flare.
>>MARTIN: It's an
injection, a mass ejection,
of energy that
comes from the sun.
You know, the sun sort of
exploding all the time.
So a mass ejection of
that, it sends particles
to the outer space.
And they hit the Earth.
And they hit the
geomagnetic field.
And that's what lights
it up and all that.
And so sometimes, there are
heightened activity in that.
There's more solar
flares, more ejections
of energy coming from the sun.
And again, this comes
back to something
we talked about earlier
about that choice.
We have a choice of emotional
response to anything.
And whatever influences
are out there,
we have a choice over
how we manage that.
And the choices, the
direction of those choices--
this always works best for me--
has really been consulting
with my heart's intelligence
about that.
Logical, linear
processing a lot of times
doesn't get it done for me.
I mean I have to make the
business decisions and things
like that from that place.
But when it comes to other
sort of major decisions
and guidance around
what I do, it
requires that connection to
the deeper heart that I have.
>>LISA: Are there new
technologies and new studies
that are coming out
with HeartMath, things
we have to look forward to?
>>MARTIN: Yeah, next interview.
Yeah.
There's a lot happening.
There will be new technologies
coming out of HeartMath.
We have Inner
Balance Trainer now
which has been hugely
popular as you know
and the emWave Pro
and all of that.
But there are new technologies
coming, new training, certainly
new scientific research
on interconnectivity
that's happening right now.
And all of that
happens in due time.
And next time we're
together, there
will be some interesting
new things for me
to share with you.
I'm sharing some
new things with you
now that I haven't shared
that much in public.
>>LISA: Which is great.
And just to touch on
that a little bit,
the emWave technology,
it's an at home hand device
that you can measure
your coherent field.
And the other one was called?
>>MARTIN: Inner Balance Trainer.
We took the same
patented technology
that we put into other
devices, we put it
into mobile applications.
So you now have it on your
phone, or your tablet,
or your pad, or whatever.
You get a sensor, it
connects to your ear.
It measures the changes
in your heart rhythms.
Scores them for the
degree of coherence,
the higher coherence the better.
And it trains us to become
more naturally coherent.
And this has been very,
very successful for us.
And there's more coming.
>>LISA: Great.
Yep, yep.
Lots of ways that
we can actually
influence the field, our
field to be great as well.
All right.
So there is a way that
you've measured this
through this beautiful
light tower called Ilumina.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
I wanted to share that with you
and with our audience today.
It really inspired me.
What happened was is that back
last year, an organization,
a wonderful
organization in Mexico,
decided to build this
gigantic 30-foot light tower
and display it at Burning Man.
And so they came to
us and they said--
worked with our engineers--
what we want to do
is interface your technology
and your HeartMath technique
into the light tower.
So that people sitting
around the light tower
hooked up to what's
called the emWave probe.
They are being led
through a technique.
As their coherence
level increases,
it influences the
lights and the sound
being produced by the tower.
So the people are
interfaced with it.
And they're controlling,
through their coherence,
through their connection
to their heart, what
happens in this tower.
And what happened was
astounding and amazing.
>>LISA: We're able
to show it to you.
So take a look at this.
It's absolutely beautiful.
[BEGIN VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- Welcome.
I'm Ilumina, an
interactive light
and sound sculpture powered by
your collective heart energy.
In this experience, you
will each use your breath
to enter a state of coherence
or deep harmony with yourself,
one another, and the universe.
Please connect the HeartMath
sensor to your earlobe.
The sensor will measure your
individual heart rhythms
to determine your collective
state of coherence.
The deeper your state
of collective coherence,
the brighter I shine.
Let's begin.
We are all connected.
We are the universe.
This is the power of
the collective heart.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love just
feeling into that music
and how it makes you
feel just by watching it.
What does your
live audience say?
>>MARTIN: They say
the same thing.
They just gasp, you know?
And I love at the
end, she says this
is the power of our
collective heart.
And that's the purpose.
It represents a
symbol to me of what
can take place, symbolically,
what can take place when we all
come together heart
to heart and work
through the spirit
of that connection
and that love and that
collaboration that we can have.
What beautiful things can
we create in this world?
And that particular video
and the light tower--
and I give those people in
Mexico a huge amount of credit
for what they did--
it represents that.
It creates a great symbol.
And it's a great way to sort of
close out my live presentations
with that uplifting feeling that
people can go into the world
and can create a better
life for themselves
and can create a
better life for others.
>>LISA: Yeah, absolutely.
Well, I always say that
most people are driven
by their big why in life.
Why do you do what you do?
What is your
biggest why, Howard?
>>MARTIN: I believe the
purpose of life is to love.
That's my why.
>>LISA: That is your big why.
>>MARTIN: You know, I
think that why are we here?
What are we doing?
You know, it's like is
it just about existing?
Is just about getting through?
>>LISA: Day to day.
>>MARTIN: At the end of the
day, you know, it won't be--
and I've thought about this.
You know, at the end of the day,
what's going to matter at most?
Right?
What's the why?
Why did I live?
You know?
What's going to mean the most?
And it won't be the number
of books that I sold
or where I spoke in the
world or any of that stuff?
It's going to be
how much did I love
and how much did I not love?
And that's the measuring stick.
So I know it sounds kind
of squishy, kind of soft,
but love is a really
important powerful thing.
It transforms.
It lives.
It's not just mushy
and sentimental
and something that shows
up on Valentine's Day.
It's just a way to live
life that I think works.
And if I can do that, then
I'm giving more to life
than I'm taking from it.
And the whys that
I'm here to help,
I'm here to help
usher people through--
do what I can to usher people
through these changing times.
And that's the why for me.
>>LISA: It's great.
And you've done a great job.
And there's more to come.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
More to come.
>>LISA: For sure.
For sure.
Well, thank you so much.
And thank you for
showing us how our world
can be a better place.
>>MARTIN: Thank you,
Lisa, for having me.
Pleasure as always.
>>LISA: Yes.
And how we can impact the
field with our thoughts.
If you would like to hear
more about Howard Martin
and HeartMath, please check
out additional "Inspiration"
interviews on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]